feat: data set lifecycle job (#588)
FilOzone/dealbot: docs/checks/data-set-lifecycle-check.md

# Data Set Lifecycle Check

This document is the **source of truth** for how dealbot's Data Set Lifecycle check works.

Source code links throughout this document point to the current implementation.

For event and metric definitions used by the dashboard, see [Dealbot Events & Metrics](./events-and-metrics.md).

> **Note**: This check calls `terminateService` to start the on-chain termination sequence. It does **not** call `PDPVerifier.deleteDataSet`, which is SP-initiated. See the [FAQ](#what-happens-on-chain-after-terminateservice-is-called) for details on what happens after termination.

## Overview

> A "data set lifecycle check" tests the full `createDataSet → terminateService` lifecycle for a storage provider. Dealbot creates an empty throwaway data set and immediately terminates it in the same run. A successful check confirms both the `createDataSet` and `terminateService` paths work correctly on the SP.

Reviewer: One thought: most of our tools do createDataSetAndAddPiece right? If it possible that createDataSet could succeed but createDataSetAddPiece could fail then I think it's important to do both (where createDataSetAndAddPiece uses a tiny piece).

Author: I think there can be case where createDataSet could succeed but createDataSetAndAddPiece could fail.

Thought on how do we do it:
1. We choose which path from these two (`createDataSet` | `createDataSetAndAddPieces`) to test via one of the following methods:
    - randomly selecting one of them
    - running both of them in a single job and we reduce job frequency to half
    - selecting alternatively in consecutive job runs
2. We've separate `checkType` in lifecycle metrics - `dataSetLifecycleCheck` and `dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheck`

Reviewer: Ok, so if we think createDataSet could succeed but createDataSetAndAddPiece could fail, then I think we execute both paths in this lifecycle job.

I think we running both of them in a single job. I don't even know if it matters that we change the default frequency. (I don't really care about the default fequency. I do want to make sure we're running frequently enough in Calibration so each provider has created at least one or two datasets in a 24 hour period.

Do we even need a different checkType. checkType=dataSetLifecycleCheck can just mean that we did both checks in parallel and success means they both completed successfullyl in time and the duration is how long it took to complete both in parallel.

Author: Agreed, we run both of them in a single job.

My only concern is observability when one succeeds and the other fails. If we want to keep `checkType=dataSetLifecycleCheck`, could we at least add a path label (values - `createDataSet` and `createDataSetAndAddPieces`) to distinguish between them?

Reviewer: I'm not too worried about being able to differentiate metrics between `createDataSet` and `createDataSetAndAddPieces`. If we start seeing failures or slowdown with the overall check, I think it's fine to starting to manually digging in to dealbot logs to learn more. 

This is coming from me feeling like our metrics are getting fairly complicated or at least extensive and I only want to add if someting is really needed.

But I don't have a strong opinion here.

> A "data set lifecycle check" tests the full `createDataSet → terminateService` lifecycle for a storage provider. Dealbot creates an empty throwaway data set and immediately terminates it in the same run. A successful check confirms both the `createDataSet` and `terminateService` paths work correctly on the SP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A "data set lifecycle check" tests the `createDataSet → terminateService` lifecycle for a storage provider. Dealbot creates an empty throwaway data set and immediately terminates it in the same run. A successful check confirms both the `createDataSet` and `terminateService` paths work correctly on the SP.

Other dataset operations like adding pieces and retrieving them is handled by the [data storage check](LINK). Data set creation isn't covered by the data storage check, and it also relies on a relatively stable set of datasets, which is why this separate check was developed.
```

| 4 | All steps complete within the timeout | Check is not marked successful until all steps pass within `DATA_SET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_JOB_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` | [`dataSetLifecycleCheckMs`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetLifecycleCheckMs) |

## Data Set Lifecycle Check Lifecycle

The dealbot scheduler triggers data set lifecycle check jobs at a configurable rate.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  CreateDataSet["createDataSet (empty data set)"] --> Wait["waitForCreateDataSet"]
  Wait -->|dataSetId confirmed| Terminate["terminateServiceSync"]
  Terminate -->|tx receipt received| Success["Mark check successful"]
  Terminate -->|error| Fail["Mark check failed"]
  Wait -->|error| Fail
  CreateDataSet -->|error| Fail
  CreateDataSet -->|abort signal| Fail
```

### 1. Apply job guards

Dealbot applies the same maintenance-window and SP-blocklist rules used by all other SP jobs. If `DATASET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_ENABLED` is `false`, the job logs a disabled skip and exits.

### 2. Create the empty data set

> Dealbot calls `createDataSet` (from `@filoz/synapse-core/sp`) to create a new empty data set on the SP. The data set is tagged with metadata `{ dealbotLifecycleCheck: "<timestamp>" }`. The fixed `dealbotLifecycleCheck` key is the handle for finding leaked sets later; the per-run value ensures a fresh data set is created on every invocation rather than resolving a prior one.

Reviewer: What is the "per run" value?
```suggestion
Dealbot calls `createDataSet` (from `@filoz/synapse-core/sp`) to create a new empty data set on the SP. The data set is tagged with metadata `{ dealbotLifecycleCheck: "<timestamp>" }`. The fixed `dealbotLifecycleCheck` key is the handle for finding leaked sets later; the `<timestamp>` value ensures a fresh data set is created on every invocation rather than resolving a prior one.
```

I did this because I was originally confused by what was meant by "per-run value". I see what you're meaning now, but I think this makes it clearer.

> This step does **not** emit `dataSetCreation` metrics — those belong to the `data_set_creation` job.

Reviewer: Turn `data_set_creation` into a hyperlink?

# Data Set Lifecycle Check

This document is the **source of truth** for how dealbot's Data Set Lifecycle check works.

Source code links throughout this document point to the current implementation.

For event and metric definitions used by the dashboard, see [Dealbot Events & Metrics](./events-and-metrics.md).

> **Note**: This check calls `terminateService` to start the on-chain termination sequence. It does **not** call `PDPVerifier.deleteDataSet`, which is SP-initiated. See the [FAQ](#what-happens-on-chain-after-terminateservice-is-called) for details on what happens after termination.

## Overview

> A "data set lifecycle check" tests the `createDataSet → terminateService` lifecycle for a storage provider. Each tick both creation path variants run in parallel, then each immediately terminates its throwaway data set. Running both variants every tick means both SP code paths are exercised on every invocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A "data set lifecycle check" tests the `createDataSet|createDataSetAndAddPieces → terminateService` lifecycle for a storage provider. Each tick _both_ creation path variants run in parallel, then each immediately terminates its throwaway data set.
```

**Empty variant**: exercises the `createDataSet` path.
1. Creates a new empty data set, tagged with `dealbotLifecycleCheck` metadata
2. Waits for the SP to confirm the data set on-chain (`dataSetId` returned)
3. Calls `terminateService` on the created data set and waits for the transaction receipt

**With-pieces variant**: exercises the `createDataSetAndAddPieces` path.

> 1. Uploads a small deterministic canary piece to the SP's HTTP storage service

Reviewer: Why deterministic? I actually think random (e..g., use current timestamp) is better to make sure that we aren't just succeeding because of piece caching.

2. Polls until the SP confirms it has ingested the piece (`findPiece` with retry)
3. Atomically creates a data set and registers the piece on-chain
4. Waits for the SP to confirm both data set creation and piece addition
5. Calls `terminateService` on the created data set and waits for the transaction receipt

A successful check requires all steps of **both** variants to complete within the allowed time. If either variant fails, the overall job fails. If both variants fail, an `AggregateError` is thrown. Failure occurs if any step fails or the check exceeds `DATA_SET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_JOB_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`.

The two variants emit metrics under distinct `checkType` labels (`dataSetLifecycleCheck` and `dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheck`) so dashboards can track them independently.

## What Gets Asserted

Each data set lifecycle check asserts the following for every SP. Both variants run every tick in parallel. Assertions 1–3 apply to the empty variant; assertions 1′–5′ apply to the with-pieces variant. Both paths share the timeout assertion.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think you can just remove to keep this more concicse

| 3′ | SP accepts atomic data set + piece creation | `createDataSetAndAddPieces` call completes and the SP returns a `statusUrl` | [`dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckStatus`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckStatus) |
| 4′ | Data set and piece are confirmed on-chain | `waitForCreateDataSetAddPieces` resolves with a `dataSetId` and `piecesIds` | [`dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckStatus`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckStatus) |
| 5′ | `terminateService` succeeds on the created data set | `terminateServiceSync` call completes and the transaction receipt is received | [`dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckMs`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckMs) |
| 6′ | All steps complete within the timeout | Check is not marked successful until all steps pass within `DATA_SET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_JOB_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` | [`dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckMs`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckMs) |

## Data Set Lifecycle Check Lifecycle

The dealbot scheduler triggers data set lifecycle check jobs at a configurable rate. On each tick, both creation variants run in parallel via `Promise.allSettled`.

```mermaid

> flowchart TD

Reviewer: This works and is accurate, and I don't think it's necessarily worth changing, but I think you could simplify it by removing/deduplicating these boxes:
- "Run both variants in parallel"
- terminateServiceSync
- Record success
- Record failure
- Collect results

I know that isn't accurate but it would reduce on the number of boxes and lines. It kind of matches how down below you have "5. Terminate the service (both variants)"

Anyways, something to consider for future

Source: [`data-set-lifecycle.service.ts` (`runLifecycleCheck`)](../../apps/backend/src/data-set-lifecycle/data-set-lifecycle.service.ts)

### 3. Empty variant: exercise `createDataSet` path

### 3a. Create the empty data set

Dealbot calls `createDataSet` (from `@filoz/synapse-core/sp`) to create a new empty data set on the SP. The data set is tagged with metadata `{ dealbotLifecycleCheck: "<timestamp>" }`. The fixed `dealbotLifecycleCheck` key is the handle for finding leaked sets later; the per-run timestamp ensures a fresh data set is created on every invocation.

This step does **not** emit `dataSetCreation` metrics — those belong to the [`data_set_creation`](../data-set-creation.md) job.

### 3b. Wait for data set creation confirmation

Dealbot calls `waitForCreateDataSet` with the `statusUrl` returned by the SP. When the SP confirms the data set is created on-chain, it resolves with a `dataSetId`.

### 4. With-pieces variant: exercise `createDataSetAndAddPieces` path

### 4a. Upload canary piece

> Dealbot calls `uploadPieceStreaming` to push a small fixed canary piece (256 bytes, all `0x61`) to the SP's HTTP storage service. The piece is deterministic so a leaked data set can always be identified by its piece CID alongside the `dealbotLifecycleCheck` metadata key.

Reviewer: Per above, I'm not sure there is value using the same pieceCID for all of these.

### 4c. Create data set with piece

Dealbot calls `createDataSetAndAddPieces` (from `@filoz/synapse-core/sp`) to atomically create the data set and register the canary piece on-chain in a single transaction. The data set is tagged with the same `dealbotLifecycleCheck` metadata.

### 4d. Wait for confirmation

Dealbot calls `waitForCreateDataSetAddPieces` with the `statusUrl` returned by the SP. When the SP confirms both the data set creation and piece addition on-chain, it resolves with `{ dataSetId, piecesIds }`.

### 5. Terminate the service (both variants)

Dealbot calls `terminateServiceSync` (from `@filoz/synapse-core/warm-storage`) on the newly created `dataSetId`. This submits the terminate transaction and waits for the receipt, confirming the termination was recorded on-chain. This is Step 1 of the [full on-chain termination sequence](#what-happens-on-chain-after-terminateservice-is-called). The job does not wait for the full ~30-day rail finalization.

The entire check (all variant steps + termination) is bounded by `DATA_SET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_JOB_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`. A timeout is classified as `failure.timedout`.

> ## Check Status Progression

Reviewer: I'm not seeing a ton of value of separating out the status progression across the two independent paths. I think you can make this one table and not worry about differentiating just to keep it simple. This is coming from the regard of wanting to keep it simple (less text to read, less code to maintain, less events/metrics to dashboard)

**Empty variant** — recorded via [`dataSetLifecycleCheckStatus`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetLifecycleCheckStatus):

| Overall Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| `success` | All steps passed: empty data set created, confirmed on-chain, service terminated. |
| `failure.timedout` | The job was aborted because it exceeded `DATA_SET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_JOB_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`. |
| `failure.other` | Any other failure: `createDataSet` failed, `waitForCreateDataSet` failed, or `terminateService` failed. |

**With-pieces variant** — recorded via [`dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckStatus`](./events-and-metrics.md#dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheckStatus):

| Overall Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| `success` | All steps passed: canary piece uploaded and ingested, data set created with piece, confirmed on-chain, service terminated. |
| `failure.timedout` | The job was aborted because it exceeded `DATA_SET_LIFECYCLE_CHECK_JOB_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`. |
| `failure.other` | Any other failure: upload failed, `findPiece` timed out, `createDataSetAndAddPieces` failed, or `terminateService` failed. |

> ## Metrics Recorded

Reviewer: Similar, I don't think we need metrics for the individual variants.

**Step 2 — rail finalization (~30 days later).** When the PDP rail's `settledUpTo` reaches `endEpoch`, `finalizeTerminatedRail` fires atomically inside the settle transaction.

**Step 3 — data set deletion at PDPVerifier (SP-initiated).** After the rail finalizes, the SP may call `PDPVerifier.deleteDataSet`. The lifecycle check does not wait for steps 2 or 3 — waiting ~30 days per invocation would defeat the purpose of a canary.

### Why two variants?

The data storage check (`data_set_creation` job) uses `createDataSetAndAddPieces` internally when creating a new data set with a piece. A canary that only exercises `createDataSet` would leave `createDataSetAndAddPieces` untested by the lifecycle check.

Both variants run on every tick. It ensures both SP code paths are exercised on every invocation rather than in expectation over two ticks. The `Promise.allSettled` approach also ensures that a failure in one variant is never hidden by success in the other.

> The empty variant exercises the `createDataSet → waitForCreateDataSet → terminateService` path. The with-pieces variant exercises `uploadPieceStreaming → findPiece → createDataSetAndAddPieces → waitForCreateDataSetAddPieces → terminateService`. The two `checkType` label values (`dataSetLifecycleCheck` and `dataSetWithPiecesLifecycleCheck`) let Grafana track them as independent time series.

Reviewer: Potentially revise if we simplify and don't have checkType.

### What if creation succeeds but termination fails?

If creation succeeds but termination fails (process crash, job timeout, or an on-chain error that is not an already-terminated no-op), the created data set stays live on the SP. This is called a leak and is an accepted trade-off for keeping the job self-contained.

> Leaked sets are discoverable by filtering data sets with the `dealbotLifecycleCheck` metadata key — this key is set by both variants. For the with-pieces variant, the canary piece is additionally identifiable by its fixed piece CID (256 bytes, all `0x61`). Each leak is recorded in the log line (message: "throwaway data set may have leaked") with the `dataSetId` included for easy identification.

Reviewer: Potentially revise if we start having a random tiny piece.
